<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>How Jean Pierre Met the Scarlet Pimpernel</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="how-jean-pierre-met-the-scarlet-pimpernel" epub:type="se:name.publication.short-story">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">How Jean Pierre Met the Scarlet Pimpernel</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">As told by Himself</p>
			</header>
			<section id="how-jean-pierre-met-the-scarlet-pimpernel-1" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p>Ah, monsieur! the pity of it, the pity! Surely there are sins which <i xml:lang="fr">le bon Dieu</i> Himself will condone. And if not⁠—well, I had to risk His displeasure anyhow. Could I see them both starve, monsieur? I ask you! and <abbr>M.</abbr> le Vicomte had become so thin, so thin, his tiny, delicate bones were almost through his skin. And <abbr>Mme.</abbr> la Marquise! an angel, monsieur! Why, in the happy olden days, before all these traitors and assassins ruled in France, <abbr>M.</abbr> and <abbr>Mme.</abbr> la Marquise lived only for the child, and then to see him dying⁠—yes, dying, there was no shutting one’s eyes to that awful fact⁠—<abbr>M.</abbr> le Vicomte de Mortain was dying of starvation and of disease.</p>
				<p>There we were all herded together in a couple of attics⁠—one of which little more than a cupboard⁠—at the top of a dilapidated half-ruined house in the Rue des Pipots⁠—<abbr>Mme.</abbr> la Marquise, <abbr>M.</abbr> le Vicomte and I⁠—just think of that, monsieur! <abbr>M.</abbr> le Marquis had his château, as no doubt you know, on the outskirts of Lyons. A loyal highborn gentleman; was it likely, I ask you, that he would submit passively to the rule of those execrable revolutionaries who had murdered their King, outraged their Queen and Royal family, and, God help them! had already perpetrated every crime and every abomination for which of a truth there could be no pardon either on earth or in Heaven? He joined that plucky but, alas! small and ill-equipped army of royalists who, unable to save their King, were at least determined to avenge him.</p>
				<p>Well, you know well enough what happened. The counterrevolution failed; the revolutionary army brought Lyons down to her knees after a siege of two months. She was then marked down as a rebel city, and after the abominable decree of October 9th had deprived her of her very name, and Couthon had exacted bloody reprisals from the entire population for its loyalty to the King, the infamous Laporte was sent down in order finally to stamp out the lingering remnants of the rebellion. By that time, monsieur, half the city had been burned down, and one-tenth and more of the inhabitants⁠—men, women, and children⁠—had been massacred in cold blood, whilst most of the others had fled in terror from the appalling scene of ruin and desolation. Laporte completed the execrable work so ably begun by Couthon. He was a very celebrated and skilful doctor at the Faculty of Medicine, now turned into a human hyena in the name of Liberty and Fraternity.</p>
				<p><abbr>M.</abbr> le Marquis contrived to escape with the scattered remnant of the Royalist army into Switzerland. But <abbr>Mme.</abbr> la Marquise throughout all these strenuous times had stuck to her post at the château like the valiant creature that she was. When Couthon entered Lyons at the head of the revolutionary army, the whole of her household fled, and I was left alone to look after her and <abbr>M.</abbr> le Vicomte.</p>
				<p>Then one day when I had gone into Lyons for provisions, I suddenly chanced to hear outside an eating-house that which nearly froze the marrow in my old bones. A captain belonging to the Revolutionary Guard was transmitting to his sergeant certain orders, which he had apparently just received.</p>
				<p>The orders were to make a perquisition at ten o’clock this same evening in the château of Mortaine as the Marquis was supposed to be in hiding there, and in any event to arrest every man, woman, and child who was found within its walls.</p>
				<p>“Citizen Laporte,” the captain concluded, “knows for a certainty that the ci-devant Marquise and her brat are still there, even if the Marquis has fled like the traitor that he is. Those cursed English spies who call themselves the League of the Scarlet Pimpernel have been very active in Lyons of late, and citizen Laporte is afraid that they might cheat the guillotine of the carcase of those aristos, as they have already succeeded in doing in the case of a large number of traitors.”</p>
				<p>I did not, of course, wait to hear any more of that abominable talk. I sped home as fast as my old legs would carry me. That selfsame evening, as soon as it was dark, <abbr>Mme.</abbr> la Marquise, carrying <abbr>M.</abbr> le Vicomte in her arms and I carrying a pack with a few necessaries on my back, left the ancestral home of the Mortaines never to return to it again: for within an hour of our flight a detachment of the revolutionary army made a descent upon the château; they ransacked it from attic to cellar, and finding nothing there to satisfy their lust of hate, they burned the stately mansion down to the ground.</p>
				<p>We were obliged to take refuge in Lyons, at any rate for a time. Great as was the danger inside the city, it was infinitely greater on the high roads, unless we could arrange for some vehicle to take us a considerable part of the way to the frontier, and above all for some sort of passports⁠—forged or otherwise⁠—to enable us to pass the various tollgates on the road, where vigilance was very strict. So we wandered through the ruined and deserted streets of the city in search of shelter, but found every charred and derelict house full of miserable tramps and destitutes like ourselves. Half dead with fatigue, <abbr>Mme.</abbr> la Marquise was at last obliged to take refuge in one of these houses which was situated in the Rue des Pipots. Every room was full to overflowing with a miserable wreckage of humanity thrown hither by the tide of anarchy and of bloodshed. But at the top of the house we found an attic. It was empty save for a couple of chairs, a table and a broken-down bedstead on which were a ragged mattress and pillow.</p>
				<p>Here, monsieur, we spent over three weeks, at the end of which time <abbr>M.</abbr> le Vicomte fell ill, and then there followed days, monsieur, through which I would not like my worst enemy to pass.</p>
				<p><abbr>Mme.</abbr> la Marquise had only been able to carry away in her flight what ready money she happened to have in the house at the time. Securities, property, money belonging to aristocrats had been ruthlessly confiscated by the revolutionary government in Lyons. Our scanty resources rapidly became exhausted, and what was left had to be kept for milk and delicacies for <abbr>M.</abbr> le Vicomte. I tramped through the streets in search of a doctor, but most of them had been arrested on some paltry charge or other of rebellion, whilst others had fled from the city. There was only that infamous Laporte⁠—a vastly clever doctor, I knew⁠—but as soon take a lamb to a hungry lion as the Vicomte de Mortaine to that bloodthirsty cutthroat.</p>
				<p>Then one day our last franc went and we had nothing left. <abbr>Mme.</abbr> la Marquise had not touched food for two days. I had stood at the corner of the street, begging all the day until I was driven off by the gendarmes. I had only obtained three sous from the passersby. I bought some milk and took it home for <abbr>M.</abbr> le Vicomte. The following morning when I entered the larger attic I found that <abbr>Mme.</abbr> la Marquise had fainted from inanition.</p>
				<p>I spent the whole of the day begging in the streets and dodging the guard, and even so I only collected four sous. I could have got more perhaps, only that at about midday the smell of food from an eating-house turned me sick and faint, and when I regained consciousness I found myself huddled up under a doorway and evening gathering in fast around me. If <abbr>Mme.</abbr> la Marquise could go two days without food I ought to go four. I struggled to my feet; fortunately I had retained possession of my four sous, else of a truth I would not have had the courage to go back to the miserable attic which was the only home I knew.</p>
				<p>I was wending my way along as fast as I could⁠—for I knew that <abbr>Mme.</abbr> la Marquise would be getting terribly anxious⁠—when, just as I turned into the Rue Blanche, I spied two gentlemen⁠—obviously strangers, for they were dressed with a luxury and care with which we had long ceased to be familiar in Lyons⁠—walking rapidly towards me. A moment or two later they came to a halt, not far from where I was standing, and I heard the taller one of the two say to the other in English⁠—a language with which I am vaguely conversant: “All right again this time, what, Tony?”</p>
				<p>Both laughed merrily like a couple of schoolboys playing truant, and then they disappeared under the doorway of a dilapidated house, whilst I was left wondering how two such elegant gentlemen dared be abroad in Lyons these days, seeing that every man, woman and child who was dressed in anything but threadbare clothes was sure to be insulted in the streets for an aristocrat, and as often as not summarily arrested as a traitor.</p>
				<p>However, I had other things to think about, and had already dismissed the little incident from my mind, when at the bottom of the Rue Blanche I came upon a knot of gaffers, men and women, who were talking and gesticulating very excitedly outside the door of a cook-shop. At first I did not take much notice of what was said: my eyes were glued to the front of the shop, on which were displayed sundry delicacies of the kind which makes a wretched, starved beggar’s mouth water as he goes by; a roast capon especially attracted my attention, together with a bottle of red wine; these looked just the sort of luscious food which <abbr>Mme.</abbr> la Marquise would relish.</p>
				<p>Well, sir, the law of God says: “Thou shalt not covet!” and no doubt that I committed a grievous sin when my hungry eyes fastened upon that roast capon and that bottle of Burgundy. We also know the stories of Judas Iscariot and of Jacob’s children who sold their own brother Joseph into slavery⁠—such a crime, monsieur, I took upon my conscience then; for just as the vision of <abbr>Mme.</abbr> la Marquise eating that roast capon and drinking that Burgundy rose before my eyes, my ears caught some fragments of the excited conversation which was going on all around me.</p>
				<p>“He went this way!” someone said.</p>
				<p>“No; that!” protested another.</p>
				<p>“There’s no sign of him now, anyway.”</p>
				<p>The owner of the shop was standing on his own doorstep, his legs wide apart, one arm on his wide hip, the other still brandishing the knife wherewith he had been carving for his customers.</p>
				<p>“He can’t have gone far,” he said, as he smacked his thick lips.</p>
				<p>“The impudent rascal, flaunting such fine clothes⁠—like the aristo that he is.”</p>
				<p>“Bah! these cursed English! They are aristos all of them! And this one with his followers is no better than a spy!”</p>
				<p>“Paid by that damned English Government to murder all our patriots and to rob the guillotine of her just dues.”</p>
				<p>“They say he had a hand in the escape of the ci-devant Duc de Sermeuse and all his brats from the very tumbril which was taking them to execution.”</p>
				<p>A cry of loathing and execration followed this statement. There was vigorous shaking of clenched fists and then a groan of baffled rage.</p>
				<p>“We almost had him this time. If it had not been for these confounded, ill-lighted streets⁠—”</p>
				<p>“I would give something,” concluded the shopkeeper, “if we could lay him by the heels.”</p>
				<p>“What would you give, citizen Dompierre?” queried a woman in the crowd, with a ribald laugh, “one of your roast capons?”</p>
				<p>“Aye, little mother,” he replied jovially, “and a bottle of my best Burgundy to boot, to drink confusion to that meddlesome Englishman and his crowd and a speedy promenade up the steps of the guillotine.”</p>
				<p>Monsieur, I assure you that at that moment my heart absolutely stood still. The tempter stood at my elbow and whispered, and I deliberately smothered the call of my conscience. I did what Joseph’s brethren did, what brought Judas Iscariot to hopeless remorse. There was no doubt that the hue and cry was after the two elegantly dressed gentlemen whom I had seen enter the dilapidated house in the Rue Blanche. For a second or two I closed my eyes and deliberately conjured up the vision of <abbr>Mme.</abbr> la Marquise fainting for lack of food, and of <abbr>M.</abbr> le Vicomte dying for want of sustenance; then I worked my way to the door of the shop and accosted the burly proprietor with as much boldness as I could muster.</p>
				<p>“The two Englishmen passed by me at the top of the Rue Blanche,” I said to him. “They went into a house⁠ ⁠… I can show you which it is⁠—”</p>
				<p>In a moment I was surrounded by a screeching, gesticulating crowd. I told my story as best I could; there was no turning back now from the path of cowardice and of crime. I saw that brute Dompierre pick up the largest roast capon from the front of his shop, together with a bottle of that wine which I had coveted; then he thrust both these treasures into my trembling hands and said:</p>
				<p>“En avant!”</p>
				<p>And we all started to run up the street, shouting: “Death to the English spies!” I was the hero of the expedition. Dompierre and another man carried me, for I was too weak to go as fast as they wished. I was hugging the capon and the bottle of wine to my heart; I had need to do that, so as to still the insistent call of my conscience, for I felt a coward⁠—a mean, treacherous, abominable coward!</p>
				<p>When we reached the house and I pointed it out to Dompierre, the crowd behind us gave a cry of triumph. In the topmost storey a window was thrown open, two heads appeared silhouetted against the light within, and the cry of triumph below was answered by a merry, prolonged laugh from above.</p>
				<p>I was too dazed to realise very clearly what happened after that. Dompierre, I know, kicked open the door of the house, and the crowd rushed in, in his wake. I managed to keep my feet and to work my way gradually out of the crowd. I must have gone on mechanically, almost unconsciously, for the next thing that I remember with any distinctness was that I found myself once more speeding down the Rue Blanche, with all the yelling and shouting some little way behind me.</p>
				<p>With blind instinct, too, I had clung to the capon and the wine, the price of my infamy. I was terribly weak and felt sick and faint, but I struggled on for a while, until my knees refused me service and I came down on my two hands, whilst the capon rolled away into the gutter, and the bottle of Burgundy fell with a crash against the pavement, scattering its precious contents in every direction.</p>
				<p>There I lay, wretched, despairing, hardly able to move, when suddenly I heard rapid and firm footsteps immediately behind me, and the next moment two firm hands had me under the arms, and I heard a voice saying:</p>
				<p>“Steady, old friend. Can you get up? There! Is that better?”</p>
				<p>The same firm hands raised me to my feet. At first I was too dazed to see anything, but after a moment or two I was able to look around me, and, by the light of a street lanthorn immediately overhead, I recognised the tall, elegantly dressed Englishman and his friend, whom I had just betrayed to the fury of Dompierre and a savage mob.</p>
				<p>I thought that I was dreaming, and I suppose that my eyes betrayed the horror which I felt, for the stranger looked at me scrutinisingly for a moment or two, then he gave the quaintest laugh I had ever heard in all my life, and said something to his friend in English, which this time I failed to understand.</p>
				<p>Then he turned to me:</p>
				<p>“By my faith,” he said in perfect French⁠—so that I began to doubt if he was an English spy after all⁠—“I verily believe that you are the clever rogue, eh? who obtained a roast capon and a bottle of wine from that fool Dompierre. He and his boon companions are venting their wrath on you, old compeer; they are calling you liar and traitor and cheat, in the intervals of wrecking what is left of the house, out of which my friend and I have long since escaped by climbing up the neighbouring gutter-pipes and scrambling over the adjoining roofs.”</p>
				<p>Monsieur, will you believe me when I say that he was actually saying all this in order to comfort me? I could have sworn to that because of the wonderful kindliness which shone out of his eyes, even through the good-humoured mockery wherewith he obviously regarded me. Do you know what I did then, monsieur? I just fell on my knees and loudly thanked God that he was safe; at which both he and his friend once again began to laugh, for all the world like two schoolboys who had escaped a whipping, rather than two men who were still threatened with death.</p>
				<p>“Then it <em>was</em> you!” said the taller stranger, who was still laughing so heartily that he had to wipe his eyes with his exquisite lace handkerchief.</p>
				<p>“May God forgive me,” I replied.</p>
				<p>The next moment his arm was again round me. I clung to him as to a rock, for of a truth I had never felt a grasp so steady and withal so gentle and kindly, as was his around my shoulders. I tried to murmur words of thanks, but again that wretched feeling of sickness and faintness overcame me, and for a second or two it seemed to me as if I were slipping into another world. The stranger’s voice came to my ear, as it were through cotton-wool.</p>
				<p>“The man is starving,” he said. “Shall we take him over to your lodgings, Tony? They are safer than mine. He may be able to walk in a minute or two, if not I can carry him.”</p>
				<p>My senses at this partly returned to me, and I was able to protest feebly:</p>
				<p>“No, no! I must go back⁠—I must⁠—kind sirs,” I murmured. “<abbr>Mme.</abbr> la Marquise will be getting so anxious.”</p>
				<p>No sooner were these foolish words out of my mouth than I could have bitten my tongue out for having uttered them; and yet, somehow, it seemed as if it was the stranger’s magnetic personality, his magic voice and kindly act towards me, who had so basely sold him to his enemies, which had drawn them out of me. He gave a low, prolonged whistle.</p>
				<p>“<abbr>Mme.</abbr> la Marquise?” he queried, dropping his voice to a whisper.</p>
				<p>Now to have uttered <abbr>Mme.</abbr> la Marquise de Mortaine’s name here in Lyons, where every aristocrat was termed a traitor and sent without trial to the guillotine, was in itself an act of criminal folly, and yet⁠—you may believe me, monsieur, or not⁠—there was something within me just at that moment that literally compelled me to open my heart out to this stranger, whom I had so basely betrayed, and who requited my abominable crime with such gentleness and mercy. Before I fully realised what I was doing, monsieur, I had blurted out the whole history of <abbr>Mme.</abbr> la Marquise’s flight and of <abbr>M.</abbr> le Vicomte’s sickness to him. He drew me under the cover of an open doorway, and he and his friend listened to me without speaking a word until I had told them my pitiable tale to the end.</p>
				<p>When I had finished he said quietly:</p>
				<p>“Take me to see <abbr>Mme.</abbr> la Marquise, old friend. Who knows? perhaps I may be able to help.”</p>
				<p>Then he turned to his friend.</p>
				<p>“Will you wait for me at my lodgings, Tony,” he said, “and let Ffoulkes and Hastings know that I may wish to speak with them on my return?”</p>
				<p>He spoke like one who had been accustomed all his life to give command, and I marvelled how his friend immediately obeyed him. Then when the latter had disappeared down the dark street, the stranger once more turned to me.</p>
				<p>“Lean on my arm, good old friend,” he said, “and we must try and walk as quickly as we can. The sooner we allay the anxieties of <abbr>Mme.</abbr> la Marquise the better.”</p>
				<p>I was still hugging the roast capon with one arm, with the other I clung to him as together we walked in the direction of the Rue des Pipots. On the way we halted at a respectable eating-house, where my protector gave me some money wherewith to buy a bottle of good wine and sundry provisions and delicacies which we carried home with us.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="how-jean-pierre-met-the-scarlet-pimpernel-2" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>Never shall I forget the look of horror which came in <abbr>Mme.</abbr> la Marquise’s eyes when she saw me entering our miserable attic in the company of a stranger. The last of the little bit of tallow candle flickered in its socket. Madame threw her emaciated arms over her child, just like some poor hunted animal defending its young. I could almost hear the cry of terror which died down in her throat ere it reached her lips. But then, monsieur, to see the light of hope gradually illuminating her pale, wan face as the stranger took her hand and spoke to her⁠—oh! so gently and so kindly⁠—was a sight which filled my poor, half-broken heart with joy.</p>
				<p>“The little invalid must be seen by a doctor at once,” he said, “after that only can we think of your ultimate safety.”</p>
				<p><abbr>Mme.</abbr> la Marquise, who herself was terribly weak and ill, burst out crying. “Would I not have taken him to a doctor ere now?” she murmured through her tears. “But there is no doctor in Lyons. Those who have not been arrested as traitors have fled from this stricken city. And my little Jose is dying for want of medical care.”</p>
				<p>“Your pardon, madame,” he rejoined gently, “one of the ablest doctors in France is at present in Lyons⁠—“</p>
				<p>“That infamous Laporte,” she broke in, horrified. “He would snatch my sick child from my arms and throw him to the guillotine.”</p>
				<p>“He would save your boy from disease,” said the stranger earnestly, “his own professional pride or professional honour, whatever he might choose to call it, would compel him to do that. But the moment the doctor’s work was done, that of the executioner would commence.”</p>
				<p>“You see, milor,” moaned Madame in pitiable agony, “that there is no hope for us.”</p>
				<p>“Indeed there is,” he replied. “We must get <abbr>M.</abbr> le Vicomte well first⁠—after that we shall see.”</p>
				<p>“But you are not proposing to bring that infamous Laporte to my child’s bedside!” she cried in horror.</p>
				<p>“Would you have your child die here before your eyes,” retorted the stranger, “as he undoubtedly will this night?”</p>
				<p>This sounded horribly cruel, and the tone in which it was said was commanding. There was no denying its truth. <abbr>M.</abbr> le Vicomte was dying. I could see that. For a moment or two madame remained quite still, with her great eyes, circled with pain and sorrow, fixed upon the stranger. He returned her gaze steadily and kindly, and gradually that frozen look of horror in her pale face gave place to one of deep puzzlement, and through her bloodless lips there came the words, faintly murmured: “Who are you?”</p>
				<p>He gave no direct reply, but from his little finger he detached a ring and held it out for her to see. I saw it too, for I was standing close by <abbr>Mme.</abbr> la Marquise, and the flickering light of the tallow candle fell full upon the ring. It was of gold, and upon it there was an exquisitely modelled, five-petalled little flower in vivid red enamel.</p>
				<p>Madame la Marquise looked at the ring, then once again up into his face. He nodded assent, and my heart seemed even then to stop its beating as I gazed upon his face. Had we not⁠—all of us⁠—heard of the gallant Scarlet Pimpernel? And did I not know⁠—far better than <abbr>Mme.</abbr> la Marquise herself⁠—the full extent of his gallantry and his self-sacrifice? The hue and cry was after him. Human bloodhounds were even now on his track, and he spoke calmly of walking out again in the streets of Lyons and of affronting that infamous Laporte, who would find glory in sending him to death. I think he guessed what was passing in my mind, for he put a finger up to his lip and pointed significantly to <abbr>M.</abbr> le Vicomte.</p>
				<p>But it was beautiful to see how completely <abbr>Mme.</abbr> la Marquise now trusted him. At his bidding she even ate a little of the food and drank some wine⁠—and I was forced to do likewise. And even when anon he declared his intention of fetching Laporte immediately, she did not flinch. She kissed <abbr>M.</abbr> le Vicomte with passionate fervour, and then gave the stranger her solemn promise that the moment he returned she would take refuge in the next room and never move out of it until after Laporte had departed.</p>
				<p>When he went I followed him to the top of the stairs. I was speechless with gratitude and also with fears for him. But he took my hand and said, with that same quaint, somewhat inane laugh which was so characteristic of him:</p>
				<p>“Be of good cheer, old fellow! Those confounded murderers will not get me this time.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="how-jean-pierre-met-the-scarlet-pimpernel-3" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p>Less than half an hour later, monsieur, citizen Laporte, one of the most skilful doctors in France and one of the most bloodthirsty tyrants this execrable Revolution has known, was sitting at the bedside of <abbr>M.</abbr> le Vicomte de Mortaine, using all the skill, all the knowledge he possessed in order to combat the dread disease of which the child was dying, ere he came to save him⁠—as he cynically remarked in my hearing⁠—for the guillotine.</p>
				<p>I heard afterwards how it all came about.</p>
				<p>Laporte, it seems, was in the habit of seeing patients in his own house every evening after he had settled all his business for the day. What a strange contradiction in the human heart, eh, monsieur? The tiger turned lamb for the space of one hour in every twenty-four⁠—the butcher turned healer. How well the English milor had gauged the strange personality of that redoubtable man! Professional pride⁠—interest in intricate cases⁠—call it what you will⁠—was the only redeeming feature in Laporte’s abominable character. Everything else in him, every thought, every action was ignoble, cruel and vengeful.</p>
				<p>Milor that night mingled with the crowd who waited on the human hyena to be cured of their hurts. It was a motley crowd that filled the dreaded proconsul’s antechamber⁠—men, women and children⁠—all of them too much preoccupied with their own troubles to bestow more than a cursory glance on the stranger who, wrapped in a dark mantle, quietly awaited his turn. One or two muttered curses were flung at the aristo, one or two spat in his direction to express hatred and contempt, then the door which gave on the inner chamber would be flung open⁠—a number called⁠—one patient would walk out, another walk in⁠—and in the ever-recurring incident the stranger for the nonce was forgotten.</p>
				<p>His turn came⁠—his number being called⁠—it was the last on the list, and the antechamber was now quite empty save for him. He walked into the presence of the proconsul. Claude Lemoine, who was on guard in the room at the time, told me that just for the space of two seconds the two men looked at one another. Then the stranger threw back his head and said quietly:</p>
				<p>“There’s a child dying of pleurisy, or worse, in an attic in the Rue des Pipots. There’s not a doctor left in Lyons to attend on him, and the child will die for want of medical skill. Will you come to him, citizen doctor?”</p>
				<p>It seems that for a moment or two Laporte hesitated.</p>
				<p>“You look to me uncommonly like an aristo, and therefore a traitor,” he said, “and I’ve half a mind⁠—”</p>
				<p>“To call your guard and order my immediate arrest,” broke in milor with a whimsical smile, “but in that case a citizen of France will die for want of a doctor’s care. Let me take you to the child’s bedside, citizen doctor, you can always have me arrested afterwards.”</p>
				<p>But Laporte still hesitated.</p>
				<p>“How do I know that you are not one of those English spies?” he began.</p>
				<p>“Take it that I am,” rejoined milor imperturbably, “and come and see the patient.”</p>
				<p>Never had a situation been carried off with so bold a hand. Claude Lemoine declared that Laporte’s mouth literally opened for the call which would have summoned the sergeant of the guard into the room and ordered the summary arrest of this impudent stranger. During the veriest fraction of a second life and death hung in the balance for the gallant English milor. In the heart of Laporte every evil passion fought the one noble fibre within him. But the instinct of the skilful healer won the battle, and the next moment he had hastily collected what medicaments and appliances he might require, and the two men were soon speeding along the streets in the direction of the Rue des Pipots.</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>During the whole of that night, milor and Laporte sat together by the bedside of <abbr>M.</abbr> le Vicomte. Laporte only went out once in order to fetch what further medicaments he required. <abbr>Mme.</abbr> la Marquise took the opportunity of running out of her hiding-place in order to catch a glimpse of her child. I saw her take milor’s hand and press it against her heart in silent gratitude. On her knees she begged him to go away and leave her and the boy to their fate. Was it likely that he would go? But she was so insistent that at last he said:</p>
				<p>“Madame, let me assure you that even if I were prepared to play the coward’s part which you would assign to me, it is not in my power to do so at this moment. Citizen Laporte came to this house under the escort of six picked men of his guard. He has left these men stationed on the landing outside this door.”</p>
				<p>Madame la Marquise gave a cry of terror, and once more that pathetic look of horror came into her face. Milor took her hand and then pointed to the sick child.</p>
				<p>“Madame,” he said, “<abbr>M.</abbr> le Vicomte is already slightly better. Thanks to medical skill and a child’s vigorous hold on life, he will live. The rest is in the hands of God.”</p>
				<p>Already the heavy footsteps of Laporte were heard upon the creaking stairs. <abbr>Mme.</abbr> la Marquise was forced to return to her hiding-place.</p>
				<p>Soon after dawn he went. <abbr>M.</abbr> le Vicomte was then visibly easier. Laporte had all along paid no heed to me, but I noticed that once or twice during his long vigil by the sickbed his dark eyes beneath their overhanging brows shot a quick suspicious look at the door behind which cowered <abbr>Mme.</abbr> la Marquise. I had absolutely no doubt in my mind then that he knew quite well who his patient was.</p>
				<p>He gave certain directions to milor⁠—there were certain fresh medicaments to be got during the day. While he spoke there was a sinister glint in his eyes⁠—half cynical, wholly menacing⁠—as he looked up into the calm, impassive face of milor.</p>
				<p>“It is essential for the welfare of the patient that these medicaments be got for him during the day,” he said dryly, “and the guard have orders to allow you to pass in and out. But you need have no fear,” he added significantly, “I will leave an escort outside the house to accompany you on your way.”</p>
				<p>He gave a mocking, cruel laugh, the meaning of which was unmistakable. His well-drilled human bloodhounds would be on the track of the English spy, whenever the latter dared to venture out into the streets.</p>
				<p><abbr>Mme.</abbr> la Marquise and I were prisoners for the day. We spent it in watching alternately beside <abbr>M.</abbr> le Vicomte. But milor came and went as freely as if he had not been carrying his precious life in his hands every time that he ventured outside the house.</p>
				<p>In the evening Laporte returned to see his patient, and again the following morning, and the next evening. <abbr>M.</abbr> le Vicomte was making rapid progress towards recovery.</p>
				<p>The third day in the morning Laporte pronounced his patient to be out of danger, but said that he would nevertheless come again to see him at the usual hour in the evening. Directly he had gone, milor went out in order to bring in certain delicacies of which the invalid was now allowed to partake. I persuaded Madame to lie down and have a couple of hours’ good sleep in the inner attic, while I stayed to watch over the child.</p>
				<p>To my horror, hardly had I taken up my stand at the foot of the bed when Laporte returned; he muttered something as he entered about having left some important appliance behind, but I was quite convinced that he had been on the watch until milor was out of sight, and then slipped back in order to find me and Madame here alone.</p>
				<p>He gave a glance at the child and another at the door of the inner attic, then he said in a loud voice:</p>
				<p>“Yes, another twenty-four hours and my duties as doctor will cease and those of patriot will recommence. But <abbr>Mme.</abbr> la Marquise de Mortaine need no longer be in any anxiety about her son’s health, nor will <abbr>Mme.</abbr> la Guillotine be cheated of a pack of rebels.”</p>
				<p>He laughed, and was on the point of turning on his heel when the door which gave on the smaller attic was opened and <abbr>Mme.</abbr> la Marquise appeared upon the threshold.</p>
				<p>Monsieur, I had never seen her look more beautiful than she did now in her overwhelming grief. Her face was as pale as death, her eyes, large and dilated, were fixed upon the human monster who had found it in his heart to speak such cruel words. Clad in a miserable, threadbare gown, her rich brown hair brought to the top of her head like a crown, she looked more regal than any queen.</p>
				<p>But proud as she was, monsieur, she yet knelt at the feet of that wretch. Yes, knelt, and embraced his knees and pleaded in such pitiable accents as would have melted the heart of a stone. She pleaded, monsieur⁠—ah, not for herself. She pleaded for her child and for me, her faithful servant, and she pleaded for the gallant gentleman who had risked his life for the sake of the child, who was nothing to him.</p>
				<p>“Take me!” she said. “I come of a race that have always known how to die! But what harm has that innocent child done in this world? What harm has poor old Jean-Pierre done, and, oh⁠ ⁠… is the world so full of brave and noble men that the bravest of them all be so unjustly sent to death?”</p>
				<p>Ah, monsieur, any man, save one of those abject products of that hideous Revolution, would have listened to such heartrending accents. But this man only laughed and turned on his heel without a word.</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>Shall I ever forget the day that went by? <abbr>Mme.</abbr> la Marquise was well-nigh prostrate with terror, and it was heartrending to watch the noble efforts which she made to amuse <abbr>M.</abbr> le Vicomte. The only gleams of sunshine which came to us out of our darkness were the brief appearances of milor. Outside we could hear the measured tramp of the guard that had been set there to keep us close prisoners. They were relieved every six hours, and, in fact, we were as much under arrest as if we were already incarcerated in one of the prisons of Lyons.</p>
				<p>At about four o’clock in the afternoon milor came back to us after a brief absence. He stayed for a little while playing with <abbr>M.</abbr> le Vicomte. Just before leaving he took Madame’s hand in his and said very earnestly, and sinking his voice to the merest whisper:</p>
				<p>“Tonight! Fear nothing! Be ready for anything! Remember that the League of the Scarlet Pimpernel have never failed to succour, and that I hereby pledge you mine honour that you and those you care for will be out of Lyons this night.”</p>
				<p>He was gone, leaving us to marvel at his strange words. <abbr>Mme.</abbr> la Marquise after that was just like a person in a dream. She hardly spoke to me, and the only sound that passed her lips was a quaint little lullaby which she sang to <abbr>M.</abbr> le Vicomte ere he dropped off to sleep.</p>
				<p>The hours went by leaden-footed. At every sound on the stairs Madame started like a frightened bird. That infamous Laporte usually paid his visits at about eight o’clock in the evening, and after it became quite dark, Madame sat at the tiny window, and I felt that she was counting the minutes which still lay between her and the dreaded presence of that awful man.</p>
				<p>At a quarter before eight o’clock we heard the usual heavy footfall on the stairs. Madame started up as if she had been struck. She ran to the bed⁠—almost like one demented, and wrapping the one poor blanket round <abbr>M.</abbr> le Vicomte, she seized him in her arms. Outside we could hear Laporte’s raucous voice speaking to the guard. His usual query: “Is all well?” was answered by the brief: “All well, citizen.” Then he asked if the English spy were within, and the sentinel replied: “No, citizen, he went out at about five o’clock and has not come back since.”</p>
				<p>“Not come back since five o’clock?” said Laporte with a loud curse. “<i xml:lang="fr">Pardi!</i> I trust that that fool Caudy has not allowed him to escape.”</p>
				<p>“I saw Caudy about an hour ago, citizen,” said the man.</p>
				<p>“Did he say anything about the Englishman then?”</p>
				<p>It seemed to us, who were listening to this conversation with bated breath, that the man hesitated a moment ere he replied; then he spoke with obvious nervousness.</p>
				<p>“As a matter of fact, citizen,” he said, “Caudy thought then that the Englishman was inside the house, whilst I was equally sure that I had seen him go downstairs an hour before.”</p>
				<p>“A thousand devils!” cried Laporte with a savage oath, “if I find that you, citizen sergeant, or Caudy have blundered there will be trouble for you.”</p>
				<p>To the accompaniment of a great deal more swearing he suddenly kicked open the door of our attic with his boot, and then came to a standstill on the threshold with his hands in the pockets of his breeches and his legs planted wide apart, face to face with <abbr>Mme.</abbr> la Marquise, who confronted him now, herself like a veritable tigress who is defending her young.</p>
				<p>He gave a loud, mocking laugh.</p>
				<p>“Ah, the aristos!” he cried, “waiting for that cursed Englishman, what? to drag you and your brat out of the claws of the human tiger.⁠ ⁠… Not so, my fine ci-devant Marquise. The brat is no longer sick⁠—he is well enough, anyhow, to breathe the air of the prisons of Lyons for a few days pending a final rest in the arms of <abbr>Mme.</abbr> la Guillotine. Citizen sergeant,” he called over his shoulder, “escort these aristos to my carriage downstairs. When the Englishman returns, tell him he will find his friends under the tender care of Doctor Laporte. En avant, little mother,” he added, as he gripped <abbr>Mme.</abbr> la Marquise tightly by the arm, “and you, old scarecrow,” he concluded, speaking to me over his shoulder, “follow the citizen sergeant, or⁠—”</p>
				<p><abbr>Mme.</abbr> la Marquise made no resistance. As I told you, she had been, since dusk, like a person in a dream; so what could I do but follow her noble example? Indeed, I was too dazed to do otherwise.</p>
				<p>We all went stumbling down the dark, rickety staircase, Laporte leading the way with <abbr>Mme.</abbr> la Marquise, who had <abbr>M.</abbr> le Vicomte tightly clasped in her arms. I followed with the sergeant, whose hand was on my shoulder; I believe that two soldiers walked behind, but of that I cannot be sure.</p>
				<p>At the bottom of the stairs through the open door of the house I caught sight of the vague outline of a large barouche, the lanthorns of which threw a feeble light upon the cruppers of two horses and of a couple of men sitting on the box.</p>
				<p><abbr>Mme.</abbr> la Marquise stepped quietly into the carriage. Laporte followed her, and I was bundled in in his wake by the rough hands of the soldiery. Just before the order was given to start, Laporte put his head out of the window and shouted to the sergeant:</p>
				<p>“When you see Caudy tell him to report himself to me at once. I will be back here in half an hour; keep strict guard as before until then, citizen sergeant.”</p>
				<p>The next moment the coachman cracked his whip, Laporte called loudly, “En avant!” and the heavy barouche went rattling along the ill-paved streets.</p>
				<p>Inside the carriage all was silence. I could hear <abbr>Mme.</abbr> la Marquise softly whispering to <abbr>M.</abbr> le Vicomte, and I marvelled how wondrously calm⁠—nay, cheerful, she could be. Then suddenly I heard a sound which of a truth did make my heart stop its beating. It was a quaint and prolonged laugh which I once thought I would never hear again on this earth. It came from the corner of the barouche next to where <abbr>Mme.</abbr> la Marquise was so tenderly and gaily crooning to her child. And a kindly voice said merrily:</p>
				<p>“In half an hour we shall be outside Lyons. Tomorrow we’ll be across the Swiss frontier. We’ve cheated that old tiger after all. What say you, <abbr>Mme.</abbr> la Marquise?”</p>
				<p>It was milor’s voice, and he was as merry as a schoolboy.</p>
				<p>“I told you, old Jean-Pierre,” he added, as he placed that firm hand which I loved so well upon my knee, “I told you that those confounded murderers would not get me this time.”</p>
				<p>And to think that I did not know him, as he stood less than a quarter of an hour ago upon the threshold of our attic in the hideous guise of that abominable Laporte. He had spent two days in collecting old clothes that resembled those of that infamous wretch, and in taking possession of one of the derelict rooms in the house in the Rue des Pipots. Then while we were expecting every moment that Laporte would order our arrest, milor assumed the personality of the monster, hoodwinked the sergeant on the dark staircase, and by that wonderfully audacious coup saved <abbr>Mme.</abbr> la Marquise, <abbr>M.</abbr> le Vicomte and my humble self from the guillotine.</p>
				<p>Money, of which he had plenty, secured us immunity on the way, and we were in safety over the Swiss frontier, leaving Laporte to eat out his tigerish heart with baffled rage.</p>
			</section>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
